content/projects/complexity/The complexity.md, before:

---
title: "Complex systems"
date: 2018-05-06T17:12:41+02:00
draft: false
subtitle: "I'm a cool subtitle!"
tags: ["Economics", "Geography", "Philosophy"]
categories: ["Complexity"]
background: "/assets/img/placeholders/pic3.jpg"
---

### Economics
Economics is the science regarding the production and consumption of goods and services in the human society. However not many efforts have been done to connect this representation to physics and the absolute thermodynamic description of what these words objectively are in nature.

Following the work of few pioneers (e.g. [Tim Garrett](http://www.inscc.utah.edu/~tgarrett/Economics/Economics.html), François Roddier ...etc...), Stefano Vezzoli (Imperial College), Mathieu Manceau ([Université Paris 13](https://scholar.google.com/citations?view_op=view_org&amp;hl=en&amp;org=8314578326704454009)) and I are developing new framework for economics as emergent critical property of self-organising systems based on energy and entropy consumption.

### Geography
Urbanisation is a trend of industrialised societies. All indications point to an increase in the urban population in the next 50 years even greater than the one happened in the preceding century. People move to cities in search of jobs and leisure, but the increased population density poses new challenges to regulators and society as a whole. Non-linear modelling as used in chaos theory can be used to study and help this process. Projects might be available in collaboration with the London startup [Placemake](http://www.placemake.io/) and the geography department.

### Philosophy and epistemology
Philosophy provides the framework of valid reasoning for humans and scientific endeavour. However, in philosophy is often not clear the different nature of quantum mechanical systems respect to the classical world we usually interact with. Together with Aaron Allegra (University of Palermo) we are trying to relate emergent properties in quantum systems with phenomenological theory.

Commit message:

added summaries to complex and nuclear parts

content/projects/complexity/The complexity.md, after:

---
title: "Complex systems"
date: 2018-05-06T17:12:41+02:00
draft: false
subtitle: "I'm a cool subtitle!"
tags: ["Economics", "Geography", "Philosophy"]
categories: ["Complexity"]
background: "/assets/img/placeholders/pic3.jpg"
subtitles: "Complex studies of society"
summary: "It is a varied field of study, related to the use of non-linear equations to describe and understand complex systems. The most interesting complex system is the human society, movement and exploitation of resources has geographical and economical implication. It is possible to use the dynamics of self-organizing systems, to understand the breadth of civilizations. And model cities with maps, automata and agents."
---

### Economics
Economics is the science regarding the production and consumption of goods and services in the human society. However not many efforts have been done to connect this representation to physics and the absolute thermodynamic description of what these words objectively are in nature.

Following the work of few pioneers (e.g. [Tim Garrett](http://www.inscc.utah.edu/~tgarrett/Economics/Economics.html), François Roddier ...etc...), Stefano Vezzoli (Imperial College), Mathieu Manceau ([Université Paris 13](https://scholar.google.com/citations?view_op=view_org&amp;hl=en&amp;org=8314578326704454009)) and I are developing new framework for economics as emergent critical property of self-organising systems based on energy and entropy consumption.

### Geography
Urbanisation is a trend of industrialised societies. All indications point to an increase in the urban population in the next 50 years even greater than the one happened in the preceding century. People move to cities in search of jobs and leisure, but the increased population density poses new challenges to regulators and society as a whole. Non-linear modelling as used in chaos theory can be used to study and help this process. Projects might be available in collaboration with the London startup [Placemake](http://www.placemake.io/) and the geography department.

### Philosophy and epistemology
Philosophy provides the framework of valid reasoning for humans and scientific endeavour. However, in philosophy is often not clear the different nature of quantum mechanical systems respect to the classical world we usually interact with. Together with Aaron Allegra (University of Palermo) we are trying to relate emergent properties in quantum systems with phenomenological theory.
